Sartre, “The Wall”
They pushed us into a big white room and I began to blink because the light hurt my
eyes. Then I saw a table and four men behind the table, civilians, looking over the
papers. They had bunched another group of prisoners in the back and we had to
cross the whole room to join them. There were several I knew and some others who
must have been foreigners. The two in front of me were blond with round skulls:
they looked alike. I supposed they were French. The smaller one kept hitching up his
pants: nerves.
It lasted about three hours: I was dizzy and my head was empty; but the room was
well heated and I found that pleasant enough: for the past 24 hours we hadn't
stopped shivering. The guards brought the prisoners up to the table, one after the
other. The four men asked each one his name and occupation. Most of the time they
didn't go any further--or they would simply ask a question here and there: "Did you
have anything to do with the sabotage of munitions?" Or "Where were you the
morning of the 9th and what were you doing?" They didn't listen to the answers or at
least didn't seem to. They were quiet for a moment and then looking straight in front
of them began to write. They asked Tom if it were true he was in the International
Brigade: Tom couldn't tell them otherwise because of the papers they found in his
coat. They didn't ask Juan anything but they wrote for a long time after he told them
his name.
"My brother Jose is the anarchist," Juan said "You know he isn't here any more. I
don't belong to any party. I never had anything to do with politics."
They didn't answer. Juan went on, "I haven't done anything. I don't want to pay for
somebody else."
His lips trembled. A guard shut him up and took him away. It was my turn.
"Your name is Pablo Ibbieta?"
"Yes."
The man looked at the papers and asked me "Where's Ramon Gris?"
"I don't know."
"You hid him in your house from the 6th to the 19th."
"No."
They wrote for a minute and then the guards took me out. In the corridor Tom and
Juan were waiting between two guards. We started walking. Tom asked one of the
guards, "So?"
"So what?" the guard said.
"Was that the cross-examination or the sentence?"
"Sentence" the guard said.
"What are they going to do with us?"
The guard answered dryly, "Sentence will be read in your cell."
As a matter of fact, our cell was one of the hospital cellars. It was terrifically cold
there because of the drafts. We shivered all night and it wasn't much better during
the day. I had spent the previous five days in a cell in a monastery, a sort of hole in
the wall that must have dated from the middle ages: since there were a lot of
prisoners and not much room, they locked us up anywhere. I didn't miss my cell; I
hadn't suffered too much from the cold but I was alone; after a long time it gets
irritating. In the cellar I had company. Juan hardly ever spoke: he was afraid and he
was too young to have anything to say. But Tom was a good talker and he knew
Spanish well.
There was a bench in the cellar and four mats. When they took us back we sat and
waited in silence. After a long moment, Tom said, "We're screwed."
"l think so too," I said, "but I don't think they'll do any thing to the kid.".
"They don't have a thing against him," said Tom. "He's the brother of a militiaman
and that's all."
I looked at Juan: he didn't seem to hear. Tom went on, "You know what they do in
Saragossa? They lay the men down on the road and run over them with trucks. A
Moroccan deserter told us that. They said it was to save ammunition."
"It doesn't save gas." I said.
I was annoyed at Tom: he shouldn't have said that.
"Then there's officers walking along the road," he went on, "supervising it all. They
stick their hands in their pockets and smoke cigarettes. You think they finish off the
guys? Hell no. They let them scream. Sometimes for an hour. The Moroccan said he
damned near puked the first time."
"I don't believe they'll do that here," I said. "Unless they're really short on
ammunition."
Day was coming in through four air holes and a round opening they had made in the
ceiling on the left, and you could see the sky through it. Through this hole, usually
closed by a trap, they unloaded coal into the cellar. Just below the hole there was a
big pile of coal dust: it had been used to heat the hospital, but since the beginning of
the war the patients were evacuated and the coal stayed there, unused; sometimes
it even got rained on because they had forgotten to close the trap.
Tom began to shiver. "Good Jesus Christ, I'm cold," he said. "Here it goes again."
He got up and began to do exercises. At each movement his shirt opened on his
chest, white and hairy. He lay on his back, raised his legs in the air and bicycled. I
saw his great rump trembling. Tom was husky but he had too much fat. I thought
how riffle bullets or the sharp points of bayonets would soon be sunk into this mass
of tender flesh as in a lump of butter. It wouldn't have made me feel like that if he'd
been thin.
I wasn't exactly cold, but I couldn't feel my arms and shoulders any more.
Sometimes I had the impression I was missing something and began to look around
for my coat and then suddenly remembered they hadn't given me a coat. It was
rather uncomfortable. They took our clothes and gave them to their soldiers leaving
us only our shirts--and those canvas pants that hospital patients wear in the middle
of summer. After a while Tom got up and sat next to me, breathing heavily.
"Warmer?"
"Good Christ, no. But I'm out of wind."
Around eight o'clock in the evening a major came in with two falangistas. He had a
sheet of paper in his hand. He asked the guard, "What are the names of those
three?"
"Steinbock, Ibbieta and Mirbal," the guard said.
The major put on his eyeglasses and scanned the list: "Steinbock...Steinbock...Oh
yes...You are sentenced to death. You will be shot tomorrow morning." He went on
looking. "The other two as well."
"That's not possible," Juan said. "Not me." The major looked at him amazed. "What's
your name?"
"Juan Mirbal" he said.
"Well your name is there," said the major. "You're sentenced."
"I didn't do anything," Juan said.
The major shrugged his shoulders and turned to Tom and me.
"You're Basque?"
"Nobody is Basque."
He looked annoyed. "They told me there were three Basques. I'm not going to waste
my time running after them. Then naturally you don't want a priest?"
We didn't even answer.
He said, "A Belgian doctor is coming shortly. He is authorized to spend the night with
you." He made a military salute and left.
"What did I tell you," Tom said. "We get it."
"Yes, I said, "it's a rotten deal for the kid."
I said that to be decent but I didn't like the kid. His face was too thin and fear and
suffering had disfigured it, twisting all his features. Three days before he was a
smart sort of kid, not too bad; but now he looked like an old fairy and I thought how
he'd never be young again, even if they were to let him go. It wouldn't have been
too hard to have a little pity for him but pity disgusts me, or rather it horrifies me.
He hadn't said anything more but he had turned grey; his face and hands were both
grey. He sat down again and looked at the ground with round eyes. Tom was good
hearted, he wanted to take his arm, but the kid tore himself away violently and
made a face.
"Let him alone," I said in a low voice, "you can see he's going to blubber."
Tom obeyed regretfully: he would have liked to comfort the kid, it would have
passed his time and he wouldn't have been tempted to think about himself. But it
annoyed me: I'd never thought about death because I never had any reason to, but
now the reason was here and there was nothing to do but think about it.
Tom began to talk. "So you think you've knocked guys off, do you?" he asked me. I
didn't answer. He began explaining to me that he had knocked off six since the
beginning of August; he didn't realize the situation and I could tell he didn't want to
realize it. I hadn't quite realized it myself, I wondered if it hurt much, I thought of
bullets, I imagined their burning hail through my body. All that was beside the real
question; but I was calm: we had all night to understand. After a while Tom stopped
talking and I watched him out of the corner of my eye; I saw he too had turned grey
and he looked rotten; I told myself "Now it starts." It was almost dark, a dim glow
filtered through the air holes and the pile of coal and made a big stain beneath the
spot of sky; I could already see a star through the hole in the ceiling: the night
would be pure and icy.
The door opened and two guards came in, followed by a blonde man in a tan
uniform. He saluted us. "I am the doctor," he said. "I have authorization to help you
in these trying hours."
He had an agreeable and distinguished voice. I said, "What do you want here?"
"I am at your disposal. I shall do all I can to make your last moments less difficult."
"What did you come here for? There are others, the hospital's full of them."
"I was sent here," he answered with a vague look. "Ah! Would you like to smoke?"
he added hurriedly, "I have cigarettes and even cigars."
He offered us English cigarettes and puros, but we refused. I looked him in the eyes
and he seemed irritated. I said to him, "You aren't here on an errand of mercy.
Besides, I know you. I saw you with the fascists in the barracks yard the day I was
arrested."
I was going to continue, but something surprising suddenly happened to me; the
presence of this doctor no longer interested me. Generally when I'm on somebody I
don't let go. But the desire to talk left me completely; I shrugged and turned my
eyes away. A little later I raised my head; he was watching me curiously. The guards
were sitting on a mat. Pedro, the tall thin one, was twiddling his thumbs, the other
shook his head from time to time to keep from falling asleep.
"Do you want a light?" Pedro suddenly asked the doctor. The other nodded "Yes": I
think he was about as smart as a log, but he surely wasn't bad. Looking in his cold
blue eyes it seemed to me that his only sin was lack of imagination. Pedro went out
and came back with an oil lamp which he set on the corner of the bench. It gave a
bad light but it was better than nothing: they had left us in the dark the night before.
For a long time I watched the circle of light the lamp made on the ceiling. I was
fascinated. Then suddenly I woke up, the circle of light disappeared and I felt myself
crushed under an enormous weight. It was not the thought of death, or fear; it was
nameless. My cheeks burned and my head ached.
I shook myself and looked at my two friends. Tom had hidden his face in his hands. I
could only see the fat white nape of his neck. Little Juan was the worst, his mouth
was open and his nostrils trembled. The doctor went to him and put his hand on his
shoulder to comfort him: but his eyes stayed cold. Then I saw the Belgian's hand
drop stealthily along Juan's arm, down to the wrist. Juan paid no attention. The
Belgian took his wrist between three fingers, distractedly, the same time drawing
back a little and turning his back to me. But I leaned backward and saw him take a
watch from his pocket and look at it for a moment, never letting go of the wrist.
After a minute he let the hand fall inert and went and leaned his back against the
wall, then, as if he suddenly remembered something very important which had to be
jotted down on the spot, he took a notebook from his pocket and wrote a few lines.
"Bastard," I thought angrily, "let him come and take my pulse. I'll shove my fist in
his rotten face."
He didn't come but I felt him watching me. I raised my head and returned his look.
Impersonally, he said to me "Doesn't it seem cold to you here?" He looked cold, he
was blue.
I'm not cold," I told him.
He never took his hard eyes off me. Suddenly I understood and my hands went to
my face: I was drenched in sweat. In this cellar, in the midst of winter, in the midst
of drafts, I was sweating. I ran my hands through my hair, gummed together with
perspiration: at the same time I saw my shirt was damp and sticking to my skin: I
had been dripping for an hour and hadn't felt it. But that swine of a Belgian hadn't
missed a thing; he had seen the drops rolling down my cheeks and thought: this is
the manifestation of an almost pathological state of terror; and he had felt normal
and proud of being alive because he was cold. I wanted to stand up and smash his
face but no sooner had I made the slightest gesture than my rage and shame were
wiped out; I fell back on the bench with indifference.
I satisfied myself by rubbing my neck with my handkerchief because now I felt the
sweat dropping from my hair onto my neck and it was unpleasant. I soon gave up
rubbing, it was useless; my handkerchief was already soaked and I was still
sweating. My buttocks were sweating too and my damp trousers were glued to the
bench.
Suddenly Juan spoke. "You're a doctor?"
"Yes," the Belgian said.
"Does it hurt... very long?"
"Huh? When... ? Oh, no" the Belgian said paternally "Not at all. It's over quickly." He
acted as though he were calming a cash customer.
"But I... they told me... sometimes they have to fire twice."
"Sometimes," the Belgian said, nodding. "It may happen that the first volley reaches
no vital organs."
"Then they have to reload their rifles and aim all over again?" He thought for a
moment and then added hoarsely, "That takes time!"
He had a terrible fear of suffering, it was all he thought about: it was his age. I never
thought much about it and it wasn't fear of suffering that made me sweat.
I got up and walked to the pile of coal dust. Tom jumped up and threw me a hateful
look: I had annoyed him because my shoes squeaked. I wondered if my face looked
as frightened as his: I saw he was sweating too. The sky was superb, no light filtered
into the dark corner and I had only to raise my head to see the Big Dipper. But it
wasn't like it had been: the night before I could see a great piece of sky from my
monastery cell and each hour of the day brought me a different memory. Morning,
when the sky was a hard, light blue, I thought of beaches on the Atlantic: at noon I
saw the sun and I remembered a bar in Seville where I drank manzanilla and ate
olives and anchovies: afternoons I was in the shade and I thought of the deep
shadow which spreads over half a bull-ring leaving the other half shimmering in
sunlight: it was really hard to see the whole world reflected in the sky like that. But
now I could watch the sky as much as I pleased, it no longer evoked anything tn me.
I liked that better. I came back and sat near Tom. A long moment passed.
Tom began speaking in a low voice. He had to talk, without that he wouldn't have
been able no recognize himself in his own mind. I thought he was talking to me but
he wasn't looking at me. He was undoubtedly afraid to see me as I was, grey and
sweating: we were alike and worse than mirrors of each other. He watched the
Belgian, the living.
"Do you understand?" he said. "I don't understand."
I began to speak in a low voice too. I watched the Belgian. "Why? What's the
matter?"
"Something is going to happen to us than I can't understand."
There was a strange smell about Tom. It seemed to me I was more sensitive than
usual to odors. I grinned. "You'll understand in a while."
"It isn't clear," he said obstinately. "I want to be brave but first I have to know. . .
.Listen, they're going to take us into the courtyard. Good. They're going to stand up
in front of us. How many?"
"l don't know. Five or eight. Not more."
"All right. There'll be eight. Someone'll holler 'aim!' and I'll see eight rifles looking at
me. I'll think how I'd like to get inside the wall, I'll push against it with my back. . . .
with every ounce of strength I have, but the wall will stay, like in a nightmare. I can
imagine all that. If you only knew how well I can imagine it."
"All right, all right!" I said. "I can imagine it too."
"lt must hurt like hell. You know they aim at the eyes and the mouth to disfigure
you," he added mechanically. "I can feel the wounds already. I've had pains in my
head and in my neck for the past hour. Not real pains. Worse. This is what I'm going
to feel tomorrow morning. And then what?"
I well understood what he meant but I didn't want to act as if I did. I had pains too,
pains in my body like a crowd of tiny scars. I couldn't get used to it. But I was like
him. I attached no importance to it. "After," I said. "you'll be pushing up daisies."
He began to talk to himself: he never stopped watching the Belgian. The Belgian
didn't seem to be listening. I knew what he had come to do; he wasn't interested in
what we thought; he came to watch our bodies, bodies dying in agony while yet
alive.
"It's like a nightmare," Tom was saying. "You want to think something, you always
have the impression that it's all right, that you're going to understand and then it
slips, it escapes you and fades away. I tell myself there will be nothing afterwards.
But I don't understand what it means. Sometimes I almost can.... and then it fades
away and I start thinking about the pains again, bullets, explosions. I'm a
materialist, I swear it to you; I'm not going crazy. But something's the matter. I see
my corpse; that's not hard but I'm the one who sees it, with my eyes. I've got to
think... think that I won't see anything anymore and the world will go on for the
others. We aren't made to think that, Pablo. Believe me: I've already stayed up a
whole night waiting for something. But this isn't the same: this will creep up behind
us, Pablo, and we won't be able to prepare for it."
"Shut up," I said, "Do you want me to call a priest?"
He didn't answer. I had already noticed he had the tendency to act like a prophet
and call me Pablo, speaking in a toneless voice. I didn't like that: but it seems all the
Irish are that way. I had the vague impression he smelled of urine. Fundamentally, I
hadn't much sympathy for Tom and I didn't see why, under the pretext of dying
together, I should have any more. It would have been different with some others.
With Ramon Gris, for example. But I felt alone between Tom and Juan. I liked that
better, anyhow: with Ramon I might have been more deeply moved. But I was
terribly hard just then and I wanted to stay hard.
He kept on chewing his words, with something like distraction. He certainly talked to
keep himself from thinking. He smelled of urine like an old prostate case. Naturally, I
agreed with him. I could have said everything he said: it isn't natural to die. And
since I was going to die, nothing seemed natural to me, not this pile of coal dust, or
the bench, or Pedro's ugly face. Only it didn't please me to think the same things as
Tom. And I knew that, all through the night, every five minutes, we would keep on
thinking things at the same time. I looked at him sideways and for the first time he
seemed strange to me: he wore death on his face. My pride was wounded: for the
past 24 hours I had lived next to Tom, I had listened to him. I had spoken to him
and I knew we had nothing in common. And now we looked as much alike as twin
brothers, simply because we were going to die together. Tom took my hand without
looking at me.
"Pablo. I wonder... I wonder if it's really true that everything ends."
I took my hand away and said, "Look between your feet, you pig."
There was a big puddle between his feet and drops fell from his pants-leg.
"What is it," he asked, frightened.
"You're pissing in your pants," I told him.
"lt isn't true," he said furiously. "I'm not pissing. I
don't feel anything."
The Belgian approached us. He asked with false solicitude. "Do you feel ill?"
Tom did not answer. The Belgian looked at the puddle and said nothing.
"I don't know what it is," Tom said ferociously. "But I'm not afraid. I swear I'm not
afraid."
The Belgian did not answer. Tom got up and went to piss in a corner. He came back
buttoning his fly, and sat down without a word. The Belgian was taking notes.
All three of us watched him because he was alive. He had the motions of a living
human being, the cares of a living human being; he shivered in the cellar the way
the living are supposed to shiver; he had an obedient, well-fed body. The rest of us
hardly felt ours--not in the same way anyhow. I wanted to feel my pants between
my legs but I didn't dare; I watched the Belgian, balancing on his legs, master of his
muscles, someone who could think about tomorrow. There we were, three bloodless
shadows; we watched him and we sucked his life like vampires.
Finally he went over to little Juan. Did he want to feel his neck for some professional
motive or was he obeying an impulse of charity? If he was acting by charity it was
the only time during the whole night.
He caressed Juan's head and neck. The kid let himself be handled, his eyes never
leaving him, then suddenly he seized the hand and looked at it strangely. He held
the Belgian's hand between his own two hands and there was nothing pleasant about
them, two grey pincers gripping this fat and reddish hand. I suspected what was
going to happen and Tom must have suspected it too: but the Belgian didn't see a
thing, he smiled paternally. After a moment the kid brought the fat red hand to his
mouth and tried to bite it. The Belgian pulled away quickly and stumbled back
against the wall. For a second he looked at us with horror, he must have suddenly
understood that we were not men like him. I began to laugh and one of the guards
jumped up. The other was asleep, his wide open eyes were blank.
I felt relaxed and over-excited at the same time. I didn't want to think any more
about what would happen at dawn, at death. It made no sense. I only found words
or emptiness. But as soon as I tried to think of anything else I saw rifle barrels
pointing at me. Perhaps I lived through my execution twenty times; once I even
thought it was for good: I must have slept a minute. They were dragging me to the
wall and I was struggling; I was asking for mercy. I woke up with a start and looked
at the Belgian: I was afraid I might have cried out in my sleep. But he was stroking
his moustache, he hadn't noticed anything. If I had wanted to, I think I could have
slept a while; I had been awake for 48 hours. I was at the end of my rope. But I
didn't want to lose two hours of life; they would come to wake me up at dawn. I
would follow them, stupefied with sleep and I would have croaked without so much
as an "Oof!"; I didn't want that. I didn't want to die like an animal, I wanted to
understand. Then I was afraid of having nightmares. I got up, walked back and forth,
and, to change my ideas, I began to think about my past life. A crowd of memories
came back to me pell-mell. There were good and bad ones--or at least I called them
that before. There were faces and incidents. I saw the face of a little novillero who
was gored tn Valencia during the Feria, the face of one of my uncles, the face of
Ramon Gris. I remembered my whole life: how I was out of work for three months in
1926, how I almost starved to death. I remembered a night I spent on a bench in
Granada: I hadn't eaten for three days. I was angry, I didn't want to die. That made
me smile. How madly I ran after happiness, after women, after liberty. Why? I
wanted to free Spain, I admired Pi y Margall, I joined the anarchist movement, I
spoke in public meetings: I took everything as seriously as if I were immortal.
At that moment I felt that I had my whole life in front of me and I thought, "It's a
damned lie." It was worth nothing because it was finished. I wondered how I'd been
able to walk, to laugh with the girls: I wouldn't have moved so much as my little
finger if I had only imagined I would die like this. My life was in front of me, shut,
closed, like a bag and yet everything inside of it was unfinished. For an instant I tried
to judge it. I wanted to tell myself, this is a beautiful life. But I couldn't pass
judgment on it; it was only a sketch; I had spent my time counterfeiting eternity, I
had understood nothing. I missed nothing: there were so many things I could have
missed, the taste of manzanilla or the baths I took in summer in a little creek near
Cadiz; but death had disenchanted everything.
The Belgian suddenly had a bright idea. "My friends," he told us, "I will undertake--if
the military administration will allow it--to send a message for you, a souvenir to
those who love you. . . ."
Tom mumbled, "I don't have anybody."
I said nothing. Tom waited an instant then looked at me with curiosity. "You don't
have anything to say to Concha?"
"No."
I hated this tender complicity: it was my own fault, I had talked about Concha the
night before. I should have controlled myself. I was with her for a year. Last night I
would have given an arm to see her again for five minutes. That was why I talked
about her, it was stronger than I was. Now I had no more desire to see her, I had
nothing more to say to her. I would not even have wanted to hold her in my arms:
my body filled me with horror because it was grey and sweating--and I wasn't sure
that her body didn't fill me with horror. Concha would cry when she found out I was
dead, she would have no taste for life for months afterward. But I was still the one
who was going to die. I thought of her soft, beautiful eyes. When she looked at me
something passed from her to me. But I knew it was over: if she looked at me now
the look would stay in her eyes, it wouldn't reach me. I was alone.
Tom was alone too but not in the same way. Sitting cross-legged, he had begun to
stare at the bench with a sort of smile, he looked amazed. He put out his hand and
touched the wood cautiously as if he were afraid of breaking something, then drew
back his hand quickly and shuddered. If I had been Tom I wouldn't have amused
myself by touching the bench; this was some more Irish nonsense, but I too found
that objects had a funny look: they were more obliterated, less dense than usual. It
was enough for me to look at the bench, the lamp, the pile of coal dust, to feel that I
was going to die. Naturally I couldn't think clearly about my death but I saw it
everywhere, on things, in the way things fell back and kept their distance, discreetly,
as people who speak quietly at the bedside of a dying man. It was his death which
Tom had just touched on the bench.
In the state I was in, if someone had come and told me I could go home quietly, that
they would leave me my life whole, it would have left me cold: several hours or
several years of waiting is all the same when you have lost the illusion of being
eternal. I clung to nothing, in a way I was calm. But it was a horrible calm--because
of my body; my body, I saw with its eyes, I heard with its ears, but it was no longer
me; it sweated and trembled by itself and I didn't recognize it any more. I had to
touch it and look at it to find out what was happening, as if it were the body of
someone else. At times I could still feel it, I felt sinkings, and fallings, as when you're
in a plane taking a nose dive, or I felt my heart beating. But that didn't reassure me.
Everything that came from my body was all cockeyed. Most of the time it was quiet
and I felt no more than a sort of weight, a filthy presence against me; I had the
impression of being tied to an enormous vermin. Once I felt my pants and I felt they
were damp; I didn't know whether it was sweat or urine, but I went to piss on the
coal pile as a precaution.
The Belgian took out his watch, looked at it. He said, "It is three-thirty."
Bastard! He must have done it on purpose. Tom jumped; we hadn't noticed time was
running out; night surrounded us like a shapeless, somber mass. I couldn't even
remember that it had begun.
Little Juan began to cry. He wrung his hands, pleaded, "I don't want to die. I don't
want to die."
